---
title: 2018 year in review
author: saroyanm
date: 2018-12-26
type: post
---


2018 was quite productive year with more than 1000 commits only in Github:


## CMintS

Begining of the year I have started developing my own Static Site Generator.
Currently there are bunch of static site generators out there, but the problem
with them is that, non of them provide complete i18n support out of the box,
most of the does provide limited i18n capabilities, for example they provide
ability to use translation strings in the Layouts, but not in the pages, so you
end up creating separate page for each language separately, plus non of them
comes with the TMS integration out of the box. Being frustrated by that I have
spend most part of the year developing a project CMintS. Currently it's almost
ready for the release, only some documentation is missing, which I hope to
complete and make the launch in next 1 or 2 months.

## Talks

Doing a lot of i18n and l10n related stuff both during my full-time job and
working on CMints, I have noticed that I have earned quite a lot of useful
knowledge, but I have no place to write them down. As I was invited to make a
presentation during Dev Days Vilnius, I have decided to put that knowledge into
a presentation, which can be found [here](). Unfortunatelly there is no online
recording of the presentation, the only information I can share is that 61.1% of
the audience thought that the presentation was good, 38.9% say it was average.
Anyway I plan to record the presentation, which I hope to put online early next
year.

## Personal life

Besides of the progress in professional life, seems like my personal life is on
the rise as well:

Besides of me being quite happy with my Girlfriend, with whom we have planned
quite an awesome 2 months long Eurotrip for the next year, I have managed to
earn German permanent residency permit after living here with my blue card for
almost 4 year. Also finally I've got my driving license, which now forces me
to find a reason to extend my commute, as I always were living in the walking
commute to my job.


## Miscelaniouse 

 told me to get Driving licence when I have got my first sallary, but I did spend it 


The year has started 

- Residency permit
- Driving license
- Code a day
- i18n pain points
- CMintS
- FYeah
- Decided to leave Cologne
