---
title: Internationalization Main Points
description: Presentation about Internationlization and Localization where I discuss different technics for implementing multi-language websites, Layouting, SEO, Linguistic details, Fonts, translation management systems and etc.
image: images/projects/cmints/logo-leaf-smm.png
author: saroyanm
date: 2019-04-22
type: post
tags: [i18n, l10n]
---

Around 2 years ago when I started working on CMintS in order to have a reference
handbook I have started collecting information about internationalization. As I
was also invited to make a presentation during [DevDays Vilnius
2018](https://devdays.lt/last-year/) putting all that information together was
the only thing I had to do to share that with the first audience.

You can find those slides below, or by <a
href="https://cmints.io/en/presentation" targer="_blank">opening them(slides) in
the new window </a> (On the moment of writing current post the presentation
slides are available in English, Lituanian, Armenian and
German):

<iframe
    width="700"
    height="400"
    src="https://cmints.io/en/presentation">
</iframe>


## Video recording

After making slides ready and presenting to the first audience I had also chance
to make several more presentations about internationalization, but
unfortunatelly no accessible enough video to share the talk with the world. As a
result I have decided to just record the talk on my own and upload them to
YouTube, with the hope that the slides and information might be useful for
others as well.

### Part 1

Begining of the video is about Localization and how wrongly localized dates,
numbers and alphabetical order can lead into misscommunication. Making things
accessible and serving relevant content to the users is also quite important for
the user retention, in that part I do cover usage of the attributes that are
quite important for the project internationalization and some techniques for
serving users more relevant content. Creating layouts for the multi-language
project might become surprisingly non-trivial task because of the way different
languages work, for example the direction of the language can require adaptation
of the layout to work both for left to right and right to left languages.
Another challenge for layouting can a design that only take into consideration
fixed mesures, it's quite easy to guess that same words can be multiple times
longer in one language than in another, taking that into consideration when
designing a layout can save one from a lot of surprises after importing new
translations into the project. More languages support means bigger font files,
splitting font files into smaller chunks is quite important for keeping the
project light and page font rendering fast. Translating SEO and SMM related tags
will help your project with the growth, provide better search results and media
content. If that's interesting for you, then you just one click away from that
content:

<iframe width="100%" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/YpRc79o-QHM"
        frameborder="0" 
        allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
        allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Part 2

In the 2-nd part of the videos about Internationalization and Localization the
discussion is about different aspects of multi-language websites creation
including: different i18n implementations, dealing with word order, fixed terms,
Static Site Generators, CMintS and various resources for creating multi-language
website.

<iframe width="100%" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/NOQ9dgeVOdo" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Process of recording

<img src="/images/talks/blanket-choice.png" class="right" width="250">

Beforehand(around 6 years ago) when I was recording presentation, I always hated
the background which were overlaying the actual presentation, that why I was
recording without camera.

Nowdays it's quite easy to acheave a good result with a green blanket and a
bright room.

1 months ago, my girlfriend asked me to choose a beach blanket for our south
european trip. First thought was when I saw the photo of the blanket is that I
can experiment with the green screen during our trip.

As I'm traveling a lot, having a proper Green screen instalation is a luxury,
but we were lucky enough that the studio apartment we were staying in the
Sitges(a city close to Barcelona) was bright enough to make the experiment with
the beach blanket.

<img src="/images/talks/green-screen.jpg">
