---
title: Year 2019 in review
description: Year 2019 in reaview, about release CMintS, JAMStack radio podcast, i18n presenation and rewriting Privacy Manager.
image: images/review/2019.jpg
twitterCard: summary_large_image
author: saroyanm
date: 2019-12-30
type: post
tags: [recap]
---

2019 was quite drastic year, but in order to keep <a href="/recap/2018"
target="_blank">the tradition</a> going, let's start with git contributions:

<strong>Github</strong>
<a href="https://github.com/Manvel" target="_blank">
<img src="/images/analytics/github-2019.png" class="full-width">
</a>
<strong>Gitlab</strong>
<a href="https://gitlab.com/saroyanm" target="_blank">
<img src="/images/analytics/gitlab-2019.png" class="full-width">
</a>

Gitlab graph shows quite nice the timeframe when I switched to working part-time
at eyeo, more about it below.

## CMintS

First big release for the 2019 was release of the headless [CMS and Static Site
Generator called CMintS](https://cmints.io/). It took 1.5year of the development
time, as a result of working late after my regular job hours and weekends,
finally [on March 9, 2019 CMintS has been released
](/projects/cmints).

By today [25 people has starred the
project](https://github.com/cmints/cmints/stargazers), hopefully the number will
grow in future and I eventually manage to adding more features into it.

During CMintS development I have collected quite a lot of materials about
Localization and Internationalization, which made sense to record somewhere and
share with the world.

## Choosing beach blanket

<img src="/images/talks/blanket-choice.jpg" class="right" width="250">

Around 7 years ago when I was doing screen recording for presentations, I always
hated that I couldn't find an easy solution for removing the background from the
camera recording.

Nowadays apparently it's quite easy to achieve a good enough result with a green
beach blanket, a bright room and a software like [OBS](https://obsproject.com/).

Right before our 2 months long south european trip my girlfriend asked me to
choose a beach blanket. First thought when I saw the photo of the blanket was
that I can find a better usecase for the green one during our trip.

As I'm traveling a lot, having a proper green screen installation is a luxury,
but we were lucky enough that the studio apartment where we were staying in the
Sitges(a city close to Barcelona) was bright enough to make the experiment with
green beach blanket.

<img src="/images/talks/green-screen.jpg" style="float: none">

### Intenationalization main points

The result of the recording was a talk about Internationalization and
Localization, which I have already gave at couple of conferances, but didn't had
an accessible enough recording until now. You can watch the result of recorded
video using green blanket below or you can also find more information about the
topic and actual slides in [another blog post about Internationalization which
was published May 2, 2019](/talks/i18n).

<iframe width="49%" height="200" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/YpRc79o-QHM"
        frameborder="0" 
        allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
        allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe width="49%"
        height="200" 
        src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/NOQ9dgeVOdo"
        frameborder="0"
        allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
        allowfullscreen></iframe>

### JAMstack radio podcast

There are several podcasts I listen to when I do sports, [JAMstack
radio](https://www.heavybit.com/library/podcasts/jamstack-radio/) hosted by
[Brian Douglas](https://twitter.com/bdougieYO)(Developer Advocate at Github) is
one of them. I've started to listen to the show when development of CMintS has
started. After launching CMintS and creating the videos about
Internationalization I felt very honored to be one of the episode guest, but I
was actually quite nervous as it was my first podcast show and quite annoyed by
the neighbours of the booked Airbnb apartment making too much noise the day the
show recording should have started, that made me already feel quite
unconcentrated and anxious, but anyway the episod was aired and seems like all
went fine.

You can find the intro below or listen to whole episode [Ep. #40, Multi-Language
Support 
here](https://www.heavybit.com/library/podcasts/jamstack-radio/ep-40-multi-language-support-with-manvel-saroyan/).

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">In episode 40 of <a href="https://twitter.com/JAMstackRadio?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@JAMstackRadio</a>, <a href="https://twitter.com/bdougieYO?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@bdougieYO</a> speaks with <a href="https://twitter.com/saroyanm?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@saroyanm</a>, a developer at <a href="https://twitter.com/eyeo?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@eyeo</a>, working on <a href="https://twitter.com/AdblockPlus?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@AdblockPlus</a>. They discuss the difficulties of integrating multi-language support into dev projects as well as Manvelâ€™s lifestyle as a digital nomad. <a href="https://t.co/SMkLrkGbdp">https://t.co/SMkLrkGbdp</a> <a href="https://t.co/twPVzbjtp0">pic.twitter.com/twPVzbjtp0</a></p>&mdash; Heavybit (@heavybit) <a href="https://twitter.com/heavybit/status/1136672555421569024?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">June 6, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

## Rewriting Privacy Manager

Privacy Manager back in the time was the project that helped me to realize my
dream of visiting Google office, as I was lucky enough because Privacy Manager
has been selected as one of the winners of the Google's organized hackathon at
Campus Party in Berlin. Back in the time I didn't know that much about privacy
and security as now I do, but success actually increased my interest in the
topics. I think Back in the time I have figured for what might jury be interested in
when selecting works, so I have developed the project accordingly, which
apparently worked.

<iframe width="560"
        height="315"
        src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/kORDTtLnJxE?start=200"
        frameborder="0"
        allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
        allowfullscreen></iframe>

After that small success, winners of the hackathon has been invited to Google's
munich office to develop the projects further and present it to the Googlers.
The week after being invite to the Google's office, we(Hackathon winners) had
flown to the Berlin in order to present the projects during the Google Big Tent
event.

<iframe width="560"
        height="315"
        src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3_kRdVwMxMU?start=451"
        frameborder="0"
        allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
        allowfullscreen></iframe>

After the success there was multiple attempts to buy Privacy Manager, but seems
like I made a correct decision of not selling it, even after an amount equal to
my year income (back in the time) was proposed, as it eventually helped me
finding my future job where I used to work for the next 5-6 years.

Privacy Manager is a special project for me, which I never managed to provide
continues support, because of being busy with other projets. Finally after 7-8
years I have managed to rewrite the project, you can read [the blog post about
rewriting Privacy Manager
here](/projects/privacy-manager/rewrite).

## Adblock Plus and working part-time

In the begining of 2019 was my 5 years aniversary of working at eyeo and being
highly involved in the development of [Adblock Plus](https://adblockplus.org/).
5 years sounds like a lot of time and spending so much time developing a project
that is used on more than 100 million devices, probably requires a separate blog
post, which I'll hopefully publish one day, but here I would like to write about
decision of moving to part-time.

In 2016-2017 I have started actively saving money, because I had two dreams -
spend more time developing my own projects and travel the world. Development of
my personal projects is the activity where I keep feeling complete freedom and
it's an activity where I can use whole potential of my brain, by involving
myself in the whole lifecycle of the project, that includes design, project
management, support, QA, SEO, SMM, PR and development. The only reason I went so
far working in Germany for a company which develops world's most popular browser
extension, is that I kept developing my side projects through my whole career
and probably luck, even though I used to work for other cool companies and
projects before [eyeo](https://eyeo.com/), the main reason I have ever granted a
job offer for that companies/projects again was my personal side projects, with
initial boost provided by my [elder brother
Alex](https://www.linkedin.com/in/alex-saroyan/)(Entrepreneur and CEO of [XCloud
Networks](https://www.xcloudnetworks.com/)). That experience made me realize
that if one day I lose my job(well everything can happen), I should stand strong
on the ground(find alternative easily and be able to sustain myself meanwhile),
but I felt that it will not be possible without leaving the comfort zone,
working only on one project all the time and keep relying only to the one source
of income.

Now I'm in the best possition possible towards my goals, I do currently work
part-time as a freelancer for eyeo(2 days per week), which seems like works out
quite good, have time developing my personal projects further, keep learning new
things and simply because I'm writting this post sitting in a cozy coffee shop
located in the middle of Phuket island next to the person I love. Seems like
that a lot of drastic changes has happened in my life since I've made the
decision to leave Germany in order to start living digital-nomad lifestyle until
we find a place where we would love to stay permanently, but for now I finally
feel what people may call happiness :)

Happy new year everyone!!!!
